[TEP-0135] Update Affinity Assistant documentation (#6892)
tektoncd/pipeline: docs/affinityassistants.md

<!--
---
linkTitle: "Affinity Assistants"

> weight: 405

Author: I'm not sure why do we need it 😂

---
-->

> # Affinity Assistants

Reviewer: nit: can you make sure to use consistent capitalization for PVC, PipelineRun, and TaskRun?

Author: Updated

Affinity Assistant is a feature to coschedule `PipelineRun` `pods` to the same node
based on [kubernetes pod affinity](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity) so that it possible for the taskruns to execute parallel while sharing volume.
Available Affinity Assistant Modes are **coschedule workspace**, **coschedule pipelineruns**,
**isolate PipelineRun** and **disabled**. 

* **coschedule workspace** - When a `PersistentVolumeClaim` is used as volume source for a `Workspace` in a `PipelineRun`,
all `TaskRun` pods within the `PipelineRun` that share the `Workspace` will be scheduled to the same Node. 
**Note:** Only one pvc-backed workspace can be mounted to each TaskRun in this mode.

* **coschedule pipelineruns (WIP)** - All `TaskRun` pods within the `PipelineRun` will be scheduled to the same Node.

* **isolate PipelineRun (WIP)** - All `TaskRun` pods within the `PipelineRun` will be scheduled to the same Node,

> and only one PipelineRun is allowed to run on a node at a time.

Author: The implementation for this feature is about to be completed. Maybe we can merge this PR after the feature is fully supported and update this section.

/hold

* **disabled** - The Affinity Assistant is disabled. No pod coscheduling behavior.

**Note:** **coschedule pipelineruns** and **isolate PipelineRun** modes are still under development and not yet functional.

This means that Affinity Assistant is incompatible with e.g. other affinity rules
 configured for the `TaskRun` pods. If the `PipelineRun` has a custom
[PodTemplate](pipelineruns.md#specifying-a-pod-template) configured, the `NodeSelector` and `Tolerations` fields
will also be set on the Affinity Assistant pod. The Affinity Assistant

> is deleted when the `PipelineRun` is completed. 

Reviewer 2: "Incompatible" is a bit ambiguous here - could you explain this a bit more?

Typically when I think of incompatibility I expect either an error to be returned or one field to take precedence over the other. But in this case it doesn't sound like either is what happens, and Affinity Assistants do coexist with PodTemplates? (though I could be misunderstanding something)

Author: I have added some explanation for it, Affinity term in PodTemplate will be overwritten by Affinity Assistant if specified:

https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/4f6c74a33b59d2bfc5d5ee14e2a9aa67d74b22f9/pkg/reconciler/taskrun/taskrun.go#L752C1-L756C3

> Currently, the Affinity Assistant Modes can be configured by the `disable-affinity-assistant` and `coschedule` feature flags.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth including the expected config map values somewhere and how they map to the modes above.

Author: Please see the above comment

> In the future, the `disabled-affinity-assistant` feature flag will be deprecated, and the Affinity Assistant Modes will be only determined by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future, the `disable-affinity-assistant` feature flag will be deprecated, and the Affinity Assistant Modes will be only determined by 
```

the `coschedule` feature flag. 

> The following chart summarizes the Affinity Assistant Modes with different combinations of the `disable-affinity-assistant` and `coschedule` feature flags during migration (when both feature flags are present) and after the migration (when only the `coschedule` flag is present).

Reviewer 2: This is the first mention of migration - when is this happening?

Author: Added 9 month deprecation time to this part

> **Note:** For users who previously accepting default behavior (enabling affinity assistant) but now want one of the new features, you need to set `disable-affinity-assistant` to "true" and then turn on the new behavior by setting `coschedule` flag. For users who previously disabling the affinity assistant but want one of the new features, just set the `coschedule` flag accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** For users who previously accepted the default behavior (enabling affinity assistant) but now want one of the new features, you need to set `disable-affinity-assistant` to "true" and then turn on the new behavior by setting the `coschedule` flag. For users who previously disabled the affinity assistant but want one of the new features, just set the `coschedule` flag accordingly.
```

> **Note:** For users who previously accepted the default behavior (enabling affinity assistant) but now want one of the new features, you need to set `disable-affinity-assistant` to "true" and then turn on the new behavior by setting the `coschedule` flag. For users who previously disabled the affinity assistant but want one of the new features, just set the `coschedule` flag accordingly.

Reviewer 2: How can I figure out if I previously accepted the default behavior?

> **Note:** For users who previously accepted the default behavior (enabling affinity assistant) but now want one of the new features, you need to set `disable-affinity-assistant` to "true" and then turn on the new behavior by setting the `coschedule` flag. For users who previously disabled the affinity assistant but want one of the new features, just set the `coschedule` flag accordingly.

Reviewer 2: Side note: it's a bit confusing that to turn on the coscheduling affinity assistant feature, you need to set disable-affinity-assistant=true - the flag names seem to conflict each other. idk if it's too late for this, but you may want to look into renaming these flags.

Author: Hi @wlynch. Yeah, there was quite a long discussion about the naming, default value and how to make the migration less confusing to users while maintaining backward compatibility: https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1025#discussion_r1227749034 and https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1031.

Based on the discussion, it appeared that turning `disable-affinity-assistant` on or off to honour `coschedule` is quite personal. This feature is added as an alpha feature, I think we can collect more user feedback before promoting it to beta.

> **Note:** **DO NOT** change the default value of the `coschedule` feature flag since the feature is work in progress and not yet functional. Please **ONLY** toggle the `disabled-affinity-assistant` feature flag to switch between **"disabled"** and **"coschedule workspace"** modes.

Reviewer: coscheduling = disabled is OK right?

Author: Yeah this is fine. And `disable-affinity-assistant` : true and `coschedule`: workspaces will also disabled AA during migration. I put it here just for simplicity as this feature will be completed soon and this note will be removed.

> **Note:** **DO NOT** change the default value of the `coschedule` feature flag since the feature is work in progress and not yet functional. Please **ONLY** toggle the `disabled-affinity-assistant` feature flag to switch between **"disabled"** and **"coschedule workspace"** modes.

Reviewer 2: You may want to make this warning more prominent - moving this up to the top + ⚠️ / 🚨 emojis + bigger font / bold would help.

We should also try and classify all of these with their stability level to set expectations around breaking changes (by default users will assume stable).

Author: Good point! Will add the stability levels for different mode!

Author: Hi @wlynch. I have removed all the warnings and WIP in the documentation, and we will hold this PR until this feature is fully implemented (https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/6927 is merged).

I have also added the stability levels for the feature, including adding it to the `alpha feature` list. PTAL 😄

> <table>

Reviewer 2: As a user / someone who isn't really familiar with this feature, I don't know what this table is supposed to be telling me 😅 

Are these the config map values?

Author: Yeah. I switched the order of the chart and the notes, so that the chart is now right below its explanations. PTAL

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>false (default)</td>
            <td>isolate-pipelinerun</td>
            <td>N/A: invalid</td>
            <td>isolate pipelinerun</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>true</td>
            <td>disabled</td>
            <td>disabled</td>
            <td>disabled</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>true</td>
            <td>workspaces (default)</td>
            <td>disabled</td>
            <td>coschedule workspaces</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>true</td>
            <td>pipelineruns</td>
            <td>coschedule pipelineruns</td>
            <td>coschedule pipelineruns</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>true</td>
            <td>isolate-pipelinerun</td>
            <td>isolate pipelinerun</td>
            <td>isolate pipelinerun</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

**Note:** Affinity Assistant use [Inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity)
that require substantial amount of processing which can slow down scheduling in large clusters

> significantly. We do not recommend using them in clusters larger than several hundred nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
significantly. We do not recommend using the affinity assistant in clusters larger than several hundred nodes.
```
